on October 4th 1957 the world watched in
awe and fear as the Soviet Union
launched Sputnik the world's first
man-made satellite into space this
little metal ball smaller than 2 feet in
diameter launched a space race between
the u.s. and USSR that would last for 18
years and change the world as we know it
Sputnik was actually not the first piece
of human technology to enter space that
superlative goes to the v2 rocket used
by Germany in missile attacks against
allied cities as a last-ditch effort in
the final years of world war ii it
wasn't very effective but at the end of
the war both the US and USSR had
captured the technology and the
scientists that had developed it and
began using them for their own projects
and by August 1957 the Soviets
successfully tested the first
intercontinental ballistic missile the
r7 the same rocket that would be used to
launch Sputnik two months later so the
scary thing about Sputnik was not the
orbiting ball itself but the fact that
the same technology could be used to
launch a nuclear warhead at any city not
wanting to fall too far behind
President Eisenhower ordered the Navy to
speed up its own project and launch a
satellite as soon as possible so on
December 6th 1957 excited people across
the nation tuned in to watch the live
broadcast as the Vanguard TV three
satellite took off and crashed to the
ground two seconds later the Vanguard
failure was a huge embarrassment for the
United States newspapers printed
headlines like flop Nick and kaputnik
and a Soviet delegate at the UN
mockingly suggested that the US should
receive foreign aid for developing
nations
fortunately the army had been working on
their own parallel project the Explorer
which was successfully launched in
January 1958 but the US had barely
managed to catch up before they were
surpassed again as Yuri Gagarin became
the first man in space in April 1961
almost a year passed and several more
Soviet astronauts completed their
missions before Project Mercury
succeeded in making John Glenn the first
American in orbit in February 1962
by this time President Kennedy had
realized that simply catching up to each
Soviet advance a few months later wasn't
going to cut it the u.s. had to do
something first and in May 1961 a month
after Gagarin's flight he announced the
goal of putting a man on the moon by the
end of the 1960s they succeeded in this
through the Apollo program with Neil
Armstrong taking his famous step on July
20th 1969 with both countries next
turning their attention to orbital space
stations there's no telling how much
longer the space race could have gone on
but because of improving relations
negotiated by Soviet premier Leonid
Brezhnev and u.s. President Nixon the
USSR and us moved toward cooperation
rather than competition the successful
joint mission known as Apollo Soyuz in
which an American Apollo spacecraft
docked with a Soviet Soyuz craft and the
two crews met shook hands and exchange
gifts marked the end of the space race
in 1975 so in the end what was the point
of this whole space race was it just a
massive waste of time
two major superpowers trying to outdo
each other by pursuing symbolic projects
that were both dangerous and expensive
using resources that could have been
better spent elsewhere
well sure sort of but the biggest
benefits of the space program had
nothing to do with one country beating
another during the space race funding
for research and education in general
increased dramatically leading to many
advances that may not have otherwise
been made many NASA technologies
developed for space are now widely used
in civilian life from memory foam in
mattresses to freeze-dried food to LEDs
in cancer treatment and of course the
satellites that we rely on for our GPS
and mobile phone signals would not have
been there without the space program all
of which goes to show that the rewards
of scientific research and advancement
are often far more vast than even the
people pursuing them can imagine
you